# xg_microbiota
Code used for the analyses in our publication on the effects of xanthan gum on the murine microbiota.

## Dietary xanthan gum alters antibiotic efficacy against the murine gut microbiota and attenuates Clostridioides difficile colonization
Matthew K. Schnizlein, Kimberly C. Vendrov, Summer J. Edwards, Eric C. Martens, Vincent B. Young 

Introduction: Dietary fiber provides a variety of microbiota-mediated benefits ranging from anti-inflammatory metabolites to pathogen colonization resistance. A healthy gut microbiota protects the host from Clostridioides difficile, formerly Clostridium difficile. Manipulation of these microbes through diet may increase colonization resistance to improve clinical outcomes. The primary objective of this study was to identify how the dietary fiber xanthan gum affects the microbiota and C. difficile colonization.
Methods: We added 5% xanthan gum to the diet of C57Bl/6 mice and examined its effect on the microbiota through 16S rRNA-gene amplicon sequencing and short-chain fatty acid analysis. Following the administration of either cefoperazone or an antibiotic cocktail, we challenged mice with C. difficile and measured colonization by monitoring colony-forming units through selective plating.
Results: Xanthan gum administration associates with increases in fiber degrading taxa and short-chain fatty acid concentrations. However, by maintaining both the diversity and absolute abundance of the microbiota during antibiotic treatment, the protective effects of xanthan gum administration on the microbiota were more prominent than the enrichment of these fiber degrading taxa. As a result, mice that were on the xanthan gum diet experienced limited to no C. difficile colonization.
Conclusions: Xanthan gum administration alters mouse susceptibility to C. difficile colonization by maintaining the microbiota during antibiotic treatment. While antibiotic-xanthan gum interactions are not well understood, xanthan gum has previously been used to bind drugs and alter their pharmacokinetics. Thus, xanthan gum may alter the activity of the oral antibiotics used to make the microbiota susceptible. Future research should further characterize how this and other common dietary fibers interact with drugs.
